# STA5069Z-ASSIGNMENT - Perceived Discrimination in the European Labor Market: Demographic Determinants and Cross-Country Variations
## INTRODUCTION
The participation of diverse labour force is crucial for the economic growth and innovation development of a country as a wider range of perspectives, knowledge, skills and experience can be brought into the country. Migrants, who are also part of the labour market, often facing unique challenges in their host countries, including legal barriers, discrimination and language proficiency. According to the international migration stock data (2024), nearly 87 million international migrants lived in Europe. Out of the 87 million migrants, there were around 44 million who were born within Europe, but living elsewhere in the region and around 40 million of non-European migrants resided in European regions (International Organization of Migration, 2020). Despite their significant presence, migrant employees experience sizeable employment gaps compared to the native employees. 

The study by Giang Ho and Rima Turk-Ariss on the labour market integration of migrants in Europe (2018) found that employment opportunities for migrants would gradually converge to that of natives, but full coverage has not been observed even after 20 years. The persistent employment gap highlights migration integration complexity and suggests that discrimination, along with other structural barriers, may continue to affect the experience in workplace by the migrants. Another interesting perspective to investigate is the so called “Integration paradox”. The integration paradox suggests that the higher-educated and more integrated migrants reports that they have experienced higher level of discrimination than those who are less integrated (Verkuyten, 2016). 

Therefore, this study aims to first examine the demographic factors influencing the discrimination perception among the labour force participants in Europe, focusing on the role of gender, age, educational attainment and country of birth. Specifically, the study will assess the predictive power of the demographic factors on the likelihood of perceiving discrimination, how perceptions of discrimination vary across different hosting countries and the key factors contributing to the variation, and whether certain groups such as highly skilled migrants are more likely to over-report or under-report their discrimination perception in order to provide further evidence to the integration paradox. By exploring these relationships, the objective of the study is to provide insight into the underlying factors contributing to the perceived discrimination and offer policy implications applicable to certain countries that can potentially help minimize the employment gap.

## Exploratory data analysis

Below shows the visualization of the proportion allocation of the discrimination types among the total respondents and the frequency of respondents under each type of discrimination and level of educational attainment, gender and age interval. As shown in the first plot, there are 55.54% of migrants reported that they have not experienced any discrimination, and 22.43% reported they have experienced only one discrimination and 20.03% reported they have experienced more than one discrimination types. In the plot of total respondents by discrimination type and age interval we can see that majority of the respondents who have responded experiencing discrimination reported that they have experienced multiple discriminations, in particular the age interval between 25 and 54 years who represents the core working population. Younger individuals (15-24 years) are more likely to have never sought work or worked, which is likely due to ongoing education or lack of work experience. Meanwhile, older individuals (55-74 years) appear to face difficulties in finding suitable jobs, possibly due to skill mismatches or age-related employment challenges. 

In terms of gender, the plot shows that the proportion of respondents to the survey is approximately the same between males and females and there are more female respondents reported than males under each discrimination type except in the “Citizenship and permanent permit” two gender categories appear to be approximately the same. In addition, females having a significantly higher proportion in barrier “Never sought work or never worked” and also multiple discriminations experienced. This supports our first hypothesis but will investigate further to see if there is any effect caused by other variables. In terms of educational attainment, majority of respondents with secondary and tertiary education reported that they experienced multiple discriminations without specifying the most significant discrimination that they are experiencing while majority of respondents with less than primary and lower secondary reported that they have experienced “Never sought work or never worked”. If the observations who have reported experiencing all types of discriminations are removed, there are only 63737 thousands of observations. 



